Rococo guide (#835)
w3f/polkadot-wiki: docs/build-parachains-rococo.md

---
id: build-parachains-rococo
title: Building Parachains on Rococo
sidebar_label: Building Parachains on Rococo
---

[Rococo](https://github.com/paritytech/cumulus#rococo-crown) is a Polkadot testnet built for testing
parachains. Rococo utilizes Cumulus and HRMP (Horizontal Relay-routed Message Passing) in order to
send transfers and messages between parachains and the Relay Chain. Every message is sent to the
Relay Chain, then from the Relay Chain to the desired parachain. Rococo currently runs the
parachains Tick, Trick and Track.

## Who are building Parachains?

As of now, the list of parachains are as follows:

- Rococo (Tick, Trick, and Track)
- Mandala
- Darwinia
- Plasm
- Robonomics
- Turbulence

## Parachain Workshop

If you are interested in running and launching your own parachain, Parity Technologies has created a
[parachain workshop](https://substrate.dev/cumulus-workshop/#/1-prep/1-compiling). There is also a
[Rococo Element chat channel](https://matrix.to/#/!WuksvCDImqYSxvNmua:matrix.parity.io?via=matrix.parity.io&via=matrix.org&via=web3.foundation)

> as well as [Rococo's GitHub repository](https://github.com/paritytech/cumulus#rococo) available.

Reviewer: hmm may not be a good idea to name it as Rococo's repo since it's under Cumulus repo

---
id: build-parachains-rococo
title: Building Parachains on Rococo
sidebar_label: Building Parachains on Rococo
---

[Rococo](https://github.com/paritytech/cumulus#rococo-crown) is a Polkadot testnet built for testing
parachains. Rococo utilizes Cumulus and HRMP (Horizontal Relay-routed Message Passing) in order to
send transfers and messages between parachains and the Relay Chain. Every message is sent to the
Relay Chain, then from the Relay Chain to the desired parachain. Rococo currently runs parachains

> Tick, Trick and Track.

Reviewer 2: "runs three test parachains (Tick Trick and Track), as well as several externally developed parachains.

Reviewer 2: since there are more listed below..

> parachains (Tick Trick and Track), as well as several externally developed parachains.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
parachains (Tick, Trick, and Track), as well as several externally developed parachains.
```

> ## Who are building Parachains?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Who is building Parachains?
```

As of now, the list of parachains are as follows:

- Rococo (Tick, Trick, and Track)
- Mandala
- Darwinia
- Plasm
- Robonomics
- Turbulence

## Parachain Workshop

If you are interested in running and launching your own parachain, Parity Technologies has created a
[parachain workshop](https://substrate.dev/cumulus-workshop/#/1-prep/1-compiling). There is also a
[Rococo Element chat channel](https://matrix.to/#/!WuksvCDImqYSxvNmua:matrix.parity.io?via=matrix.parity.io&via=matrix.org&via=web3.foundation)
as well as [Cumulus' GitHub repository](https://github.com/paritytech/cumulus#rococo) available.

### Obtaining ROC

There currently isn't a faucet available for ROC and disbursements are only limited to parachain
builders for the time being. It's recommended at this point to run your own parachains testnet

> locally.

Reviewer 2: Add a link to the Rococo chatroom as a place for people to ask for Rococo

Author: Ah that's already in there =)
Scroll up to "Parachain workshop"

## How to connect to a Parachains

If you would like to connect to a parachain via [Polkadot-JS Apps](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/),

> you may do so by heading over to the network selection at the top left hand corner of the navigation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
you may do so by clicking on the network selection at the top left hand corner of the navigation
```

and selecting any parachain of choice. For the purpose of these following examples, we will be using
the Rococo testnet "Custom Node" underneath "Development", according to the
[parachain workshop](https://substrate.dev/cumulus-workshop/#/1-prep/1-compiling).

![parachains on polkadotjs](assets/polkadotjs_network_parachains.png)

## How to make Cross Chain transfers

> To send a transfer between parachains, let's start with heading over to "Accounts" > "Transfer".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To send a transfer between parachains, navigate to "Accounts" > "Transfer".
```

parachain 200. To do so, we will need to head to the "Network" > "Parachains" tab and click on the
"Transfer to chain" button.

![rococo downward transfer](assets/rococo/rococo-downward-transfer.png)

Notice here, that we can select which parachain to send the funds to, specify the amount to be sent,
and add any comments or a memo for the transfer.

### Upward Transfers

Upward transfers occur _from_ a parachain _to_ an account on the Relay Chain. To proceed with this
kind of transfer, we need to be connected to a parachain node on the network and be on the
"Network" > "Parachains" tab. Click on the "Transfer to chain" button.

![rococo upward transfer](assets/rococo/rococo-upward-transfer.png)

Note that the toggle should be set to off, ensuring that the funds go to the Relay Chain and not
another parachain.

### Lateral Transfers

This type of transfer is only possible with at least two different registered parachains. In true
XCMP, lateral transfers would allow for messages to be sent directly from one parachain to another.
However, this is not yet implemented, so the Relay Chain is helping us deliver messages for the time

> being. Lateral transfers work through the depository model, which means that in order to transfer

Reviewer 2: add ".. this is called HRMP, Horizontal Relay-Chain Message Passing.."

> tokens from chain 200 to chain 300, there must already be tokens owned by chain 200 deposited on

Reviewer 3: Wait, why? If I'm transferring X from A to B, why should B already have to have some of X?

Author: Yeah lateral transfers are confusing and I find that they don't make the most sense, in this [link](https://substrate.dev/cumulus-workshop/#/4-cross-chain/3-lateral?id=depository-model), it says that they might revisit this model in the future and explains more of why this model is the way that it is.

Reviewer 3: Yeah that's silly. Maybe link to that here as well.

> ---

Reviewer 2: General advice:

Tell the user what to do, remove "so" and other filler words.  For example,

```
So you need to foo the bar.
```

change to

```
Foo the bar.
```

Substrate onto your machine.

```zsh
curl https://getsubstrate.io -sSf | bash -s -- --fast
```

Make sure you have the Polkadot repository cloned locally and checkout to the `fd4b176` commit.

```
git clone https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot.git
cd polkadot
git checkout fd4b176
```

Now it's time to build the Relay Chain node. Note that this command could take some time to run on
your machine.

```
cargo build --release
```

## Building the Parachain Template

Next we will be building the parachain template inside the `polkadot` repo, which will be used to
launch parachains. First, we will clone the parachain template and checkout to the `2710c42` commit.

```
git clone https://github.com/substrate-developer-hub/substrate-parachain-template.git
cd substrate-parachain-template
git checkout 2710c42
```

Now we will begin building the parachain template in our terminal. Again, this can take some time to
run on your computer.

```
cargo build --release
```

## Defining the Chain Spec

Once you've cloned the Polkadot repo and the parachain template, the next step is to select and
download a chain spec. A chain specification is needed for your Relay Chain because it contains

> information such as the genesis block, the chain type, and more. Depending on the number of

Reviewer 2: How would I know how many validators I have at this point?  I recommend suggesting a single JSON file OR explaining more in-depth.

validators you have, you can choose one from the three files below.

- [rococo-local.json:](https://substrate.dev/cumulus-workshop/specs/rococo-local.json) This is a
  two-validator Relay Chain with Alice and Bob as authorities.
- [rococo-3.json:](https://substrate.dev/cumulus-workshop/specs/rococo-3.json) A three-validator
  Relay Chain with Alice, Bob, and Charlie as the third validator.
- [rococo-4.json:](https://substrate.dev/cumulus-workshop/specs/rococo-4.json) A four-validator
  Relay Chain with Dave as the fourth validator.

### Creating your own Chain Spec

If you aren't interested in downloading pre-made chain specs for the Relay Chain, there is also the
option to build one yourself based on an existing specification. To do so, begin by running this

> command:

Reviewer 2: Explain you need to be in polkadot repo, NOT template.

```
./target/release/polkadot build-spec --chain rococo-local --disable-default-bootnode > rococo-custom-plain.json
```

When you create your own chain spec, there are a few considerations to keep in mind. One being that
Rococo is a Proof-of-Authority chain, so you will need to add in an authority and its session keys

> to the file. So you will need to modify the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to the file. Modify the following lines in the generated `JSON` file:
```

---
id: build-parachains-rococo
title: Building Parachains on Rococo
sidebar_label: Building Parachains on Rococo
---

[Rococo](https://github.com/paritytech/cumulus#rococo-crown) is a Polkadot testnet built for testing

> parachains. Rococo utilizes Cumulus and HRMP (Horizontal Relay-chain Message Passing) in order to

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
parachains. Rococo utilizes Cumulus and HRMP (Horizontal Relay-routed Message Passing) in order to
```

send transfers and messages between parachains.

## Setting the Environment

To connect to the Rococo testnet, we need to prepare the environment. This command will install

> substrate onto your machine.

Reviewer 4: Either Substrate if a proper noun or `substrate` if referring to the CLI.

> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```zsh
```

FWIW we can specify the code blocks as bash, zsh, or sh and get some syntax highlighting. Usually it's not very dramatic for shell commands as it is with other languages.

curl https://getsubstrate.io -sSf | bash -s -- --fast
```

> Now make sure you have the Polkadot repo installed and checkout to the `fd4b176` commit.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Make sure you have the Polkadot repository cloned locally and checkout to the `fd4b176` commit.
```

download a chain spec. A chain specification is needed for your Relay Chain because it contains
information such as the genesis block, the chain type, and more. Depending on the number of
validators you have, you can choose one from the three files below.

- [rococo-local.json:](https://substrate.dev/cumulus-workshop/specs/rococo-local.json) This is a
  two-validator Relay Chain with Alice and Bob as authorities.
- [rococo-3.json:](https://substrate.dev/cumulus-workshop/specs/rococo-3.json) A three-validator
  Relay Chain with Alice, Bob, and Charlie as the third validator.
- [rococo-4.json:](https://substrate.dev/cumulus-workshop/specs/rococo-4.json) A four-validator
  Relay Chain with Dave as the fourth validator.

### Creating your own Chain Spec

If you aren't interested in downloading pre-made chain specs for the Relay Chain, there is also the
option to build one yourself based on an existing specification. To do so, begin by running this
command:

```
./target/release/polkadot build-spec --chain rococo-local --disable-default-bootnode > rococo-custom-plain.json
```

When you create your own chain spec, there are a few considerations to keep in mind. One being that

> Rococo is a Proof of Authority chain, so you will need to add in an authority and its session keys

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Rococo is a Proof-of-Authority chain, so you will need to add in an authority and its session keys
```

to the file. So you will need to modify the following:

> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```json
```

2020-08-24 17:36:40 📦 Highest known block at #0
2020-08-24 17:36:40 〽️ Prometheus server started at 127.0.0.1:9615
2020-08-24 17:36:40 👶 Starting BABE Authorship worker
2020-08-24 17:36:45 💤 Idle (0 peers), best: #0 (0xe482…3e12), finalized #0 (0xe482…3e12), ⬇ 0 ⬆ 0
2
```

Notice a few things about this output:

- Chain specification is `Rococo Local Testnet`.
- Validator node name is set to `Alice`.
- Role is set to `AUTHORITY`. This means is that alice is a validator node.
- `Local node identity is: 12D3KooWJJzcDNfGi3FXifAhrmZP1baL4heEJAKHZbE6mz7pCmgH` this is **Alice's
  peer ID** and will be used for setting up other validator nodes.
- `Prometheus server started at 127.0.0.1:9615`, the `127.0.0.1` is **Alice's IP**.
- `Idle (0 peers)` will change depending on how many other validators you have running.

To run another validator, you will need the following command in another terminal:

```
./target/release/polkadot --chain /rococo-#.json --tmp --ws-port 9966 --port 30335 --NODE --bootnodes /ip4/<Alice ID>/tcp/30333/p2p/<Alice peer ID>
```

> Important note: When you run another validator, change the values for `--ws-port` and `--port`, so

> > that they aren't conflicting with eachother. The Rococo `json` file should be kept the same here.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
> that they aren't conflicting with each other. The Rococo `json` file should be kept the same here.
```

> ## Connect to Polkadot JS UI

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Connect to Polkadot-JS Apps
```

> At this point, you are now ready to connect your local node to the Polkadot JS UI. To do so, head

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
At this point, you are now ready to connect your local node to the Polkadot-JS Apps. To do so, head
```

![rococo-connected-to-ui](assets/rococo/rococo-ui-connected.png)

## Starting the Parachain with the Relay Chain

In order for the parachain to launch properly, we first need to register it with the Relay Chain. We
will begin by running this command to generate a WASM file inside your substrate parachain template
folder:

```
./target/release/parachain-collator export-genesis-wasm > para-wasm
```

Next, inside the same terminal, you will need to run the collator node.

```
./target/release/parachain-collator --tmp --validator --ws-port # --port # --parachain-id 200 -- --chain <Path to>/rococo-#.json --bootnodes /ip4/<Alice IP>/tcp/<Alice port>/p2p/<Alice Peer ID> <Other Relay Chain Node(s)>
```

> Tip: to check what your validator nodes are doing on the network so far, you can look for:
> `✍️ Starting parachain attestation session (parent: 0xe482…3e12) with active duty LocalDuty { validation: Relay, index: 0 `
> in your terminal. In this case, this validator node is working on the Relay Chain.

Note that for `--port` and `--ws-port` you need to set to different values than your validator
nodes. Also take note that for creating more parachains, you'd need to change the value of the

> `--parachain-id`, and it is not required that the parachain id in this case be `200`, it can be

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`--parachain-id`, and it is not required that the parachain ID in this case be `200`, it can be
```

> whatever id you'd like that to be. The `<Alice port>` should also be replaced with alice's port

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
whatever ID you choose. The `<Alice port>` should also be replaced with alice's port
```

The ID needs to be numeric, is there a range that it must be within? Any IDs that won't work?

number created.

Once that starts running in your terminal, an important thing to grab is the genesis state. It will
be in the format:

```
2020-08-11 13:58:06 Parachain genesis state: 0x00000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000097600fcfeeed0c7c2e7d922081a466c4c00f2af96ce17f4a07d59e7d47e8354b03170a2e7597b7b7e3d84c05391d139a62b157e78786d8c082f29dcf4c11131400
```

This is the genesis state of the parachain and will be used to actually register the parachain in

> the Polkadot JS UI. It is recommended to keep this in a safe place to refer back to.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
the Polkadot-JS Apps. It is recommended to keep this in a safe place to refer back to.
```

At this point the console log should resemble something like this:

> ```2020-08-25 13:32:11 Parachain Collator Template

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```
2020-08-25 13:32:11 Parachain Collator Template
```

Author: I'm a bit confused on why you want this deleted. Could you explain?

Reviewer 4: Oops, this didn't get formatted right. I was suggesting a newline after the code fence:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/25539605/91725029-f8120e80-eb52-11ea-9ce7-25168e306b61.png)

Author: OH okay cool, I can add this in :)

2020-08-25 13:32:33 💤 [Parachain] Idle (0 peers), best: #0 (0x6d45…12f6), finalized #0 (0x6d45…12f6), ⬇ 0 ⬆ 0
2020-08-25 13:32:35 💤 [Relaychain] Idle (3 peers), best: #270 (0xe7f2…3743), finalized #267 (0x8bfc…8abb), ⬇ 0.7kiB/s ⬆ 0.3kiB/s
2020-08-25 13:32:36 ✨ [Relaychain] Imported #271 (0x256f…8849)
2020-08-25 13:32:38 💤 [Parachain] Idle (0 peers), best: #0 (0x6d45…12f6), finalized #0 (0x6d45…12f6), ⬇ 0 ⬆ 0
2020-08-25 13:32:40 💤 [Relaychain] Idle (3 peers), best: #271 (0x256f…8849), finalized #269 (0x2dd2…9964), ⬇ 1.5kiB/s ⬆ 0.5kiB/s
2020-08-25 13:32:42 ✨ [Relaychain] Imported #272 (0x709a…c025)
2020-08-25 13:32:43 💤 [Parachain] Idle (0 peers), best: #0 (0x6d45…12f6), finalized #0 (0x6d45…12f6), ⬇ 0 ⬆ 0
2020-08-25 13:32:45 💤 [Relaychain] Idle (3 peers), best: #272 (0x709a…c025), finalized #269 (0x2dd2…9964), ⬇ 0.6kiB/s ⬆ 0.3kiB/s
```

Note a few things about this new output:

- `Parachain id: Id(200)` is referring to the id of the parachain that we set it to.
- `Parachain Account: 5Ec4AhPTL6nWnUnw58QzjJvFd3QATwHA3UJnvSD4GVSQ7Gop` is important for cross chain
  transfers.

> ## Registering the Parachain on Polkadot JS UI

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion 
## Registering the Parachain on Polkadot-JS Apps
```

2020-08-26 10:21:42 ✨ [Parachain] Imported #2 (0xecb7…5384)
2020-08-26 10:21:42 💤 [Relaychain] Idle (3 peers), best: #138 (0x0950…150c), finalized #135 (0xf9ee…9c97), ⬇ 639.9kiB/s ⬆ 821.5kiB/s
2020-08-26 10:21:44 💤 [Parachain] Idle (0 peers), best: #1 (0xbf54…d665), finalized #0 (0x6d45…12f6), ⬇ 0 ⬆ 0
2020-08-26 10:21:47 💤 [Relaychain] Idle (3 peers), best: #138 (0x0950…150c), finalized #135 (0xf9ee…9c97), ⬇ 2.5kiB/s ⬆ 2.6kiB/s
2020-08-26 10:21:48 ✨ [Relaychain] Imported #139 (0x9455…a954)
2020-08-26 10:21:48 🙌 Starting consensus session on top of parent 0xecb70e1f3f69112f854c1e48db49ee3078ced2fe2e813a30422faebb8c635384
2020-08-26 10:21:48 🎁 Prepared block for proposing at 3 [hash: 0x270a31530a178e422fe29bc038b8ea1000c21863619624b1ec292f3fcfa1f003; parent_hash: 0xecb7…5384; extrinsics (3): [0x1cfe…1f17, 0x0784…6e50, 0x2259…cec2]]
2020-08-26 10:21:48 ✨ [Parachain] Imported #3 (0x270a…f003)
```

> This now shows that the Relay Chain is starting to import blocks and that the collator is
> collating!

## Interacting with your Parachain

> If you head over to https://polkadot.js.org/apps/ and connect the network your collator port, you

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If you head over to [apps](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/) and connect the network your collator port, you
```

- `Idle (0 peers)` will change depending on how many other validators you have running.

To run another validator, you will need the following command in another terminal:

```
./target/release/polkadot --chain /rococo-#.json --tmp --ws-port 9966 --port 30335 --NODE --bootnodes /ip4/<Alice ID>/tcp/30333/p2p/<Alice peer ID>
```

> Important note: When you run another validator, change the values for `--ws-port` and `--port`, so
> that they aren't conflicting with each other. The Rococo `json` file should be kept the same here.

## Connect to Polkadot-JS Apps

At this point, you are now ready to connect your local node to the Polkadot-JS Apps. To do so, head
over to the [user interface](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/) and change the network to `Local Node`.
For now, you can change the custom endpoint to one of your validator `--ws-port` values. When this
the network is connected, the main page should look like this:

![rococo-connected-to-ui](assets/rococo/rococo-ui-connected.png)

## Starting the Parachain with the Relay Chain

In order for the parachain to launch properly, we first need to register it with the Relay Chain. We

> will begin by running this command to generate a WASM file inside your substrate parachain template

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
will begin by running this command to generate a Wasm file inside your substrate parachain template
```

2020-08-25 13:32:28 💤 [Parachain] Idle (0 peers), best: #0 (0x6d45…12f6), finalized #0 (0x6d45…12f6), ⬇ 0 ⬆ 0
2020-08-25 13:32:30 ✨ [Relaychain] Imported #270 (0xe7f2…3743)
2020-08-25 13:32:30 💤 [Relaychain] Idle (3 peers), best: #270 (0xe7f2…3743), finalized #267 (0x8bfc…8abb), ⬇ 1.2kiB/s ⬆ 0.5kiB/s
2020-08-25 13:32:33 💤 [Parachain] Idle (0 peers), best: #0 (0x6d45…12f6), finalized #0 (0x6d45…12f6), ⬇ 0 ⬆ 0
2020-08-25 13:32:35 💤 [Relaychain] Idle (3 peers), best: #270 (0xe7f2…3743), finalized #267 (0x8bfc…8abb), ⬇ 0.7kiB/s ⬆ 0.3kiB/s
2020-08-25 13:32:36 ✨ [Relaychain] Imported #271 (0x256f…8849)
2020-08-25 13:32:38 💤 [Parachain] Idle (0 peers), best: #0 (0x6d45…12f6), finalized #0 (0x6d45…12f6), ⬇ 0 ⬆ 0
2020-08-25 13:32:40 💤 [Relaychain] Idle (3 peers), best: #271 (0x256f…8849), finalized #269 (0x2dd2…9964), ⬇ 1.5kiB/s ⬆ 0.5kiB/s
2020-08-25 13:32:42 ✨ [Relaychain] Imported #272 (0x709a…c025)
2020-08-25 13:32:43 💤 [Parachain] Idle (0 peers), best: #0 (0x6d45…12f6), finalized #0 (0x6d45…12f6), ⬇ 0 ⬆ 0
2020-08-25 13:32:45 💤 [Relaychain] Idle (3 peers), best: #272 (0x709a…c025), finalized #269 (0x2dd2…9964), ⬇ 0.6kiB/s ⬆ 0.3kiB/s

> ```

Reviewer 2: I think we can shorten the output here by 15 - 20 lines and still get the point across..

Note a few things about this new output:

- `Parachain id: Id(200)` is referring to the id of the parachain that we set it to.
- `Parachain Account: 5Ec4AhPTL6nWnUnw58QzjJvFd3QATwHA3UJnvSD4GVSQ7Gop` is important for cross chain
  transfers.

## Registering the Parachain on Polkadot-JS Apps

> At this point, the parachain is ready to be registered officially in the UI. The first step is to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The parachain is now ready to be registered. The first step is to
```

head underneath `Developer` and click on the `Sudo` button.

![rococo registration](assets/rococo/rococo-register-parachain.png)

> We will need the genesis state from before that we copied and placed in the `initial_head_data`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We will need the genesis state that we copied and placed in the `initial_head_data`
```

section. On this page, you will see other details like the `id`, `ParaInfo`, and `code`. In the `id`
field, we will want to place the ID of the parachain, in this case it would be `200`. The `ParaInfo`

> should be set to always, and the `code` field should contain the WASM file that was created while

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
should be set to `always`, and the `code` field should contain the Wasm file that was created while
```

Reviewer 2: Proper capitalization is "Wasm" - see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WebAssembly

Author: Hm, in the [style guide here](https://www.notion.so/web3foundation/W3F-Writing-Style-Guide-6469d6cb5e644bc2b0663cf1f016424c), it says to refer to wasm as WASM. Does this mean that the style guide should also be updated and other parts of the wiki that reference this?

2020-08-26 10:21:42 ✨ [Parachain] Imported #2 (0xecb7…5384)
2020-08-26 10:21:42 💤 [Relaychain] Idle (3 peers), best: #138 (0x0950…150c), finalized #135 (0xf9ee…9c97), ⬇ 639.9kiB/s ⬆ 821.5kiB/s
2020-08-26 10:21:44 💤 [Parachain] Idle (0 peers), best: #1 (0xbf54…d665), finalized #0 (0x6d45…12f6), ⬇ 0 ⬆ 0
2020-08-26 10:21:47 💤 [Relaychain] Idle (3 peers), best: #138 (0x0950…150c), finalized #135 (0xf9ee…9c97), ⬇ 2.5kiB/s ⬆ 2.6kiB/s
2020-08-26 10:21:48 ✨ [Relaychain] Imported #139 (0x9455…a954)
2020-08-26 10:21:48 🙌 Starting consensus session on top of parent 0xecb70e1f3f69112f854c1e48db49ee3078ced2fe2e813a30422faebb8c635384
2020-08-26 10:21:48 🎁 Prepared block for proposing at 3 [hash: 0x270a31530a178e422fe29bc038b8ea1000c21863619624b1ec292f3fcfa1f003; parent_hash: 0xecb7…5384; extrinsics (3): [0x1cfe…1f17, 0x0784…6e50, 0x2259…cec2]]
2020-08-26 10:21:48 ✨ [Parachain] Imported #3 (0x270a…f003)
```

> This now shows that the Relay Chain is starting to import blocks and that the collator is
> collating!

## Interacting with your Parachain

> If you head over to [apps](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/) and connect the network your collator

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you navigate to [apps](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/) and connect the network your collator
```

> port, you will now see that your parachain collator is now connected to the Polkadot network.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
port, you will now see that your parachain collator is now connected to the Rococo Relay Chain.
```

Depending on your `--ws-port` value, the custom endpoint should match that.

![rococo parachain connected](assets/rococo/rococo-change-network.png)

> At this point, you can make transfers between accounts on your parachain. However, to produce a

Reviewer 2: Can you explain why this makes a successful transfer?

successful transfer, you will need to enter the following `json` snippet inside "Settings" >
"Developer" and hit the "Save" button.

```
{
  "Address": "AccountId",
  "LookupSource": "AccountId"
}
```

Without this `json` code added in, an error will occur whenever you attempt to make a transfer:

![rococo error](assets/rococo/rococo-error.png)

For reference, the page should look like this after you've added in the code:

![rococo json](assets/rococo/rococo-add-json.png)

## Launching another Parachain Node

> To launch another parachain node, you may notice that it is similar to launching our first parachain

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To launch another parachain node, you follow a process similar to launching our first parachain node,
```

> yet with subtle differences:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
but with a few subtle differences:
```

```
./target/release/parachain-collator --tmp --bootnodes /ip4/<Collator ip>/tcp/<Collator port>/p2p/<Collator peer id>  --ws-port # --port # --parachain-id <Parachain id> --validator  -- --chain ./specs/rococo-#.json  --bootnodes <Alice, Bob, and other Relay Chain collators>
```

> Note here that when launching another parachain node in a separate terminal, you'll need to change
> the `<Parachain id>` to a different id than your first parachain. The chain spec can lead to the

> > same file as your other colllator, or you can generate a new WASM and point it to there.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> same file as your other collator, or you can generate a new runtime (Wasm blob).
```

From here, you will need to go thru the
[parachain registration steps](build-parachains-rococo#registering-the-parachain-on-polkadot-js-ui)
again in order to see and interact with your new parachain node on the network.

![rococo two parachains](assets/rococo/rococo-two-parachains.png)

## How to make Cross Chain transfers

To send a transfer between parachains, let's start with heading over to "Accounts" > "Transfer".

> From here, you'll need to select the parachain node that you have. Next, enter in the amount that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
From here, you'll need to select the parachain node that you are running. Next, enter in the amount that
```

you'd like to send to another parachain. Be sure to select the correct parachain you'd like to send

> an amount to. Once you've hit the Submit button, you should see a green notification button,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
an amount to. Once you've hit the Submit button, you should see a green notification,
```

indicating a successful transfer.

### Downward Transfers

> Downward transfers are when an account on the Relay Chain sends a transfer to their own account on a

Reviewer 2: Is it really their own account?

different parachain. This type of transfer uses a depository and mint model, meaning that when the

> DOT leave the senders account on the Relay Chain and are transferred into an account on a parachain,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
DOT leave the sender's account on the Relay Chain and are transferred into an account on a parachain,
```

> the parachain mints a corresponding amount of tokens in the specified amount on the parachain.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the parachain mints a corresponding amount of tokens on the parachain.
```

For example, we can send tokens from Alice's account on the Relay Chain to her own account on
parachain 200. To do so, we will need to head to the "Network" > "Parachains" tab and click on the
"Transfer to chain" button.

![rococo downward transfer](assets/rococo/rococo-downward-transfer.png)

Notice here, that we can select which parachain to send the funds to, specify the amount to be sent,
and add any comments or a memo for the transfer.

### Upward Transfers

> Upward transfers are when you are on a parachain and want to send a transfer to another account on

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Upward transfers occur _from_ a parachain _to_ an account on
```

> the Relay Chain. To proceed with this kind of transfer, we need to be connected to the parachain

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the Relay Chain. To proceed with this kind of transfer, we need to be connected to a parachain
```

> node on the network and be on the "Network" > "Parachains" tab and click on the "Transfer to chain"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
node on the network and be on the "Network" > "Parachains" tab.  Click on the "Transfer to chain"
```

button.

![rococo upward transfer](assets/rococo/rococo-upward-transfer.png)

> Note here that the toggle should be set to off, that way the funds go to the Relay Chain and not

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that the toggle should be set to off, ensuring that the funds go to the Relay Chain and not
```

Reviewer 2: Which toggle?  Add name.

another parachain.

### Lateral Transfers

This type of transfer is only possible with at least two different registered parachains. In true
XCMP, lateral transfers would allow for messages to be sent directly from one parachain to another.
However, this is not yet implemented, so the Relay Chain is helping us deliver messages for the time

> being. How lateral transfers work is thru the depository model, which means in order to transfer

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
being. Lateral transfers work through the depository model, which means that in order to transfer
```

> tokens from chain 200 to chain 300, there must already be tokens owned by chain 200 in a depository

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
tokens from chain 200 to chain 300, there must already be tokens owned by chain 200 deposited
```

on chain 300.

> Before we can actually send funds from one parachain to another, we must ensure that the chain 's

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before we can actually send funds from one parachain to another, we must ensure that the chain's
```

account on the receiptent chain has some funds in it. In this example, Alice will be sending some
funds from her account on parachain 200 to her account on parachain 300.

> We will need to grab that parachains account address, from our parachain 300's terminal:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can get that parachain account address, from our parachain 300's terminal:
```

```
2020-08-26 14:46:34 Parachain Account: 5Ec4AhNv5ArwGxtngtW8qcVgzpCAu8nokvnh6vhtvvFkJtpq
```

> Then from the Alice's account on the Relay Chain, she is able to send some amount to parachain 200's

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
From Alice's account on the Relay Chain, she is able to send some amount to parachain 200's
```

depository.

![rococo lateral transfer](assets/rococo/rococo-lateral-transfer.png)

> From there, Alice is able to send from her account on parachain 200 to her account on parachain 300.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Alice is now able to send from her account on parachain 200 to her account on parachain 300.
```
